We saw earlier how linear support vector
machines served as effective classifiers
for some datasets,
by finding a decision boundary with
maximum margin between the classes.
Linear support vector
machines worked well for
simpler kinds of classification problems,
where the classes were linearly
separable or close to linearly separable
like this example on the left.
But with real data, many classification
problems aren't this easy.
With the different classes located in
future space in a way that a line or
hyperplane can't act as
an effective classifier.
Here's an example on the right.
These dataset is difficult,
or impossible for
a linear model, a line or
hyperplane, to classify well.
So to help address the situation,
we're now going to turn to our next
type of supervised learning model.
A very powerful extension of
linear support vector machines
called kernelized support vector machines.
Basically, kernelized support vector
machines, which I'll just call SVMs,
can provide more complex models that can
go beyond linear decision boundaries.
As with other supervised machine
learning methods, SVMs can be used for
both classification and regression.
But due to time constraints, we'll focus
only on classification in this lecture.
We also won't go into the mathematical
details of how SVMs operate, but
we will give an high level overview that
hopefully captures the most important
elements of this method.
In essence, one way to think
about what kernelized SVMs do,
is they take the original
input data space and
transform it to a new higher dimensional
feature space, where it becomes much
easier to classify the transform
to data using a linear classifier.
Here's a simple 1-dimensional
example of what I mean.
Here's a binary classification
problem in 1-dimension
with a set of points that
lie along the x-axis.
Color black for one class and
white for the second class.
Each data point here has just one feature.
It's positioned on the x-axis.
If we gave this problem to
a linear support vector machine,
it would have no problem
finding the decision boundary.
It gives the maximum margin between
points of different classes.
Here I've engineered the data points, so
that the maximum margin decision
boundary happens to be at x = 0.
Now suppose we gave the linear support
vector machine a harder problem,
where the classes are no
longer linearly separable.
A simple linear decision boundary just
doesn't have enough expressive power to
classify all these points correctly.
So what can we do about this?
One very powerful idea is
to transform the input data
from a 1-dimensional space
to a 2-dimensional space.
We can do this, for example, by mapping
each 1-dimensional input data instance xi
to a corresponding
2-dimensional ordered pair xi,
xi squared, whose new second feature is
the squared value of the first feature.
We're not adding in any new information in
the sense that all we need to obtain this
new 2-dimensional version
is already present
in the original 1-dimensional data point.
This might remind you of a similar
technique that we saw when adding
polynomial features to a linear
regression problem earlier in the course.
We can now learn a linear support
vector machine in this new,
2-deminsional feature space,
whose maximum margin decision
boundary might look like this here
to correctly classify the points.
Any future 1-dimensional points for
which we'd like to predict the class,
we can just create the 2-deminsional
transformed version and predict the class
of the 2-deminsional point,
using this 2-deminsional linear SVM.
If we took the inverse of
the transformation we just applied to
bring the data points back
to our original input space,
we can see that the linear decision
boundary in the 2-deminsional space
corresponds to the two points where
a parabola crosses the x-axis.
Now just so
that this very important idea is clear,
let's move from a 1-dimensional problem to
a 2-deminsional classification problem.
You can see the same powerful
idea in action here.
Here we have two classes represented
by the black and the white points.
Each of which has two features, x0 and x1.
The points of both classes
are scattered around the origin 00 in
a 2-deminsional plane.
The white points form
a cluster right around 00,
that's completely surrounded
by the black points.
Again, this looks to be impossible for
a linear classifier, which in
2-deminsional space is a straight line,
to separate the white points from the
black points with any degree of accuracy.
But just as we did in the 1-dimensional
case, we can map each 2-deminsional
point (x0,x1) to a new 3-deminsional
point by adding a third feature.
Mathematically 1-(x0 squared+x1 squared),
and this transformation acts to shape
the points into a parabaloid around (0,0).
Now the wide points since they're close
to (0,0), get mapped to points with
higher vertical z values, that new
third feature that are close to 1.
While the black points which
are farther from (0,0)
get mapped to points with z values that
either close to 0 or even negative.
With this transformation,
it makes it possible to find a hyperplane.
Say, z = 0.9,
that now easily separates the white
data points that are near z = 1 from
most or all of the black data points.
Finally, the decision boundary
consists of the set of points
in 3-deminsional space where the
paraboloid intersects the maximum margin
hyperplane decision boundary.
This corresponds to an ellipse-like
decision boundary in 2-deminsional space
that separates the white points from the
black points in the original input space.
This idea of transforming the input
data points to a new feature space where
a linear classifier can be easily applied,
is a very general and powerful one.
There are lots of different possible
transformations we could apply to data.
And the different kernels available for
the kernelized SVM correspond
to different transformations.
Here we're going to focus mainly on what's
called the radial basis function kernel,
which we'll abbreviate as RBF.
And also look briefly look at
something called a polynomial kernel,
that's also included with
scikit-learns SVM module.
The kernel function in an SVM tells us,
given two points in
the original input space, what is their
similarity in the new feature space?
For the radial basis function kernel,
the similarity between two points and
the transformed feature
space is an exponentially
decaying function of the distance
between the vectors and
the original input space as
shown by the formula here.
So what does the radial basis function
feature transformation look like?
Well, this diagram should
give an intuitive idea.
Here's another graphical illustration
of a binary classification problem.
And again this diagram is for
illustration purposes only and
it's just an approximation, but
essentially you can think of it in
a similar way to the 2-deminsional to
3-deminsional example we saw earlier.
So on the left,
is a set of samples in the input space.
The circles represent the training
points of one class and
the squares represent training
points of a second class.
On the right, the same samples are shown
in the transformed feature space.
Using the radial basis function kernel in
effect, transforms all the points inside
a certain distance of the circle class to
one area of the transformed feature space.
And all the points in the square class
outside a certain radius get moved to
a different area of the feature space.
The dark circles and squares represents
the points that might lie along
the maximum margin for a support vector
machine in the transformed feature space.
And also, it shows the corresponding
points in the original input space.
So just as we saw with the simple 1D and
2D examples earlier, the kernelized
support vector machine tries to
find the decision boundary with maximum
margin between classes using a linear
classifier in the transformed feature
space not the original input space.
The linear decision boundary
learn feature space by linear SVM
corresponds to a non-linear decision
boundary In the original input space.
So in this example, an ellipse like
closed region in the input space.
Now, one of the mathematically remarkable
things about kernelized support vector
machines, something referred to as
the kernel trick, is that internally,
the algorithm doesn't have to perform
this actual transformation on the data
points to the new high
dimensional feature space.
Instead, the kernelized SVM can compute
these more complex decision boundaries
just in terms of similarity calculations
between pairs of points in the high
dimensional space where the transformed
feature representation is implicit.
This similarity function which
mathematically is a kind of dot product
is the kernel in kernelized SVM.
And for
certain kinds of high dimensional spaces,
the similarity calculation between points,
the kernel function can have a simple
form like we see with the radial
bases function calculation.
This makes it practical to apply
support vector machines, when
the underlying transformed feature space
is complex or even infinite dimensional.
Even better, we could easily plug
in a variety of different kernels
choosing one to suit
the properties of our data.
Again, different choices of kernel
correspond to different types of
transformations to that higher
dimensional feature space.
Here's the result of using a support
vector machine with RBF kernel,
on that more complex binary
classification problem we saw earlier.
You can see that unlike
a linear classifier,
the SVM with RBF kernel finds a more
complex and very effective set of
decision boundaries that are very good
at separating one class from the other.
Note that the SVM classifier is still
using a maximum margin principle to find
these decision boundaries.
But because of the non-linear
transformation of the data,
these boundaries may no longer always
be equally distant from the margin
edge points in the original input space.
Now let's look at an example of how we
did this using scikit-learn in Python.
To use SVMs, we simply import
the SVC class from sklearn.svm and
use it just as we would
in the other classifier.
For example, by calling the fit method
with the training data to train the model.
There is an SVC parameter called kernel,
that allows us to set the kernel
function used by the SVM.
By default, the SVM will use
the radial base's function, but
a number of other choices are supported.
Here in the second example and
plot, we show the use of the polynomial
kernel instead of the RBF kernel.
The polynomial kernel,
using the kernel poly setting, essentially
represents a future transformation
similar to the earlier quadratic example.
In the lecture,
this future space represented in terms of
futures that are polynomial combinations
of the original input features,
much as we saw also for linear regression.
The polynomial kernel takes
additional parameter degree
that controls the model complexity and the
computational cost of this transformation.
You may have noticed that the RBF
kernel has a parameter gamma.
Gamma controls how far the influence
of a single trending example reaches,
which in turn affects how
tightly the decision boundaries
end up surrounding points
in the input space.
Small gamma means a larger
similarity radius.
So that points farther apart
are considered similar.
Which results in more points being group
together and smoother decision boundaries.
On the other hand for larger values of
gamma, the kernel value to K is more
quickly and points have to be very
close to be considered similar.
This results in more complex,
tightly constrained decision boundaries.
You can see the effect of increasing
gamma that is sharpening the kernel
in this example from the notebook.
Small values of gamma give broader,
smoother decision regions.
While larger values of gamma give smaller,
more complex decision regions.
You can set the gamma parameter
when creating the SVC object
to control the kernel width in this way,
as shown in this code.
You may recall from linear SVMs that SVMs
also have a regularization parameter,
C, that controls the tradeoff between
satisfying the maximum margin
criterion to find the simple
decision boundary, and
avoiding misclassification
errors on the training set.
The C parameter is also an important
one for kernelized SVMs,
and it interacts with the gamma parameter.
This example from the notebook shows the
effect of varying C and gamma together.
If gamma is large,
then C will have little to no effect.
Well, if gamma is small,
the model is much more constrained and
the effective C will be similar to how
it would affect a linear classifier.
Typically, gamma and C are tuned together,
with the optimal combination typically
in an intermediate range of values.
For example, gamma between 0.0001 and
10 and see between 0.1 and 100.
Though the specifical optimal values
will depend on your application.
Kernelized SVMs are pretty
sensitive to settings of gamma.
The most important thing
to remember when applying
SVMs is that it's important
to normalize the input data,
so that all the features have comparable
units that are on the same scale.
We saw this earlier with some other
learning methods like regularized
regression.
Let's apply a support vector machine
with RBF kernel to a real world dataset
to see why this
normalization is important.
Here, we'll apply a support
vector machine with RBF kernel
to the breast cancer dataset.
Note that we're not touching
the input data in anyway,
we're simply passing in the raw values.
We can see the results with training
set accuracy of 1.00 and the test set
accuracy of 0.63 that show that the
support vector machine is over fitting.
It's doing well on the training data,
but very poorly on the test data.
Now let's add a MinMaxScaler
transformation of the training data.
Remembering to also apply
the same scaler to the test data.
After this scaler has been applied,
all the input features now lie
in the same range zero to one.
And looking at these new results, the
tests set accuracy is much, much higher,
96%.
This illustrates what a huge difference
normalizing the features of the training
data can have on SVM performance.
Let's review the strengths and
weaknesses of support vector machines.
On the positive side,
support vector machines perform well
on a range of datasets, and have been
successfully applied on data that ranges
from text to images and many more types.
The support vector machine's
also potentially very versatile,
due to its ability to specify
different kernel functions,
including possible custom kernel
functions depending on the data.
Support vector machines also
typically work well for
both low and high-dimensional data.
Including data with hundreds, thousands or
even millions of sparse dimensions.
This makes it well suited to
test classification for example.
On the negative side as the training set
size increases, the run time, speed,
and memory usage in the SVM
training phase also increases.
So for a large datasets with
hundreds of thousands, or
millions of instances,
an SVM may become less practical.
As we saw when applying a support
vector machine to a real world dataset,
using an SVM requires careful
normalization of the input data
as well as parameter tuning.
The input should be normalized that
all features have comparable units and
around similar scales
if they aren't already.
Support vector machines also don't
provide direct probability estimates for
predictions, which are needed for
some applications.
Now, there are ways to estimate these
probabilities using techniques such as
plot scaling, which transforms the output
of the classifier to a probability
distribution over classes by fitting
a logistic regression model to
the classifiers course.
Finally, it could be difficult to
interpret the internal model parameters of
a support vector machine.
Which means the applicability
of support vector machines
in scenarios where interpretation
is important for people may
be limited when we want to understand
why a particular prediction was made.
As a reminder, there are three main
parameters that control model complexity
for kernelized SVMs.
First, there's the kernel type which
defaults to RBF for radial basis function.
But several other common types
are available in scikit-learns SVC module.
Second, each kernel has one or more
kernel specific parameters that control
aspects like the influence of training
points according to their distance.
In the case of the RBF kernel,
SVM performance is very sensitive to
the setting of the gamma parameter
that controls the kernel width.
Finally, for any support vector machine,
the C: regularization parameter
operates as we've discussed before.
And it's typically tuned with
the kernel parameters such as gamma for
optimal performance.